#Assign one métier to each logbook event.

= Introduction =

WP2 goal was to investigate a range of multivariate statistical methods and to develop a tool selecting the most appropriate one for assigning one métier to each logbook event. This tool allows defining métiers at DCF Level7 and aggregates them into the DCF Level5.

Logbooks data are the main source of data for getting information on the fishing activities. From logbooks data, information of EU level gear type and selectivity feature of the gear are directly available. However, fishers do not declare which species they are actually targeting when fishing, and therefore the DCF Level5 and the more precise DCF Level7, expected to reflect the fishing intention, has to be inferred from the available data, and in particular the catch data. Following, the ICES (2003) recommendation, analyses have been performed on landings composition expressed in cash value as this may reflect more accurately the actual targeting choices of the fishermen.

The work consisted in designing several sequential steps to have a complete tool firstly allowing identifying métiers from logbooks raw data and then assigning a métier to a new dataset.
These sequential steps aim at:

i) Identifying the main species out of all species recorded and reducing the dataset to these key species only (Step 1). These key species were selected from the application of three different filtering methods.

ii) Investigating the gain when running a PCA on the quality of the final classification (PCA is likely to discard potential irrelevant information) (Step 2).

iii) Running a selection of clustering methods (HAC, or K-Means or CLARA algorithm) to group similar logbook events and defining the characteristic species-based assemblage of each cluster (DCF Level7)(Step 3).

iv) Converting them to a corresponding DCF Level5 category and comparing with simpler ordination methods (Step 4).

v) Predicting the classification of any new logbook event into the categories of defined métiers (Step 5). 



= Details =

Add your content here.  Format your content with:
  * Text in *bold* or _italic_
  * Headings, paragraphs, and lists
  * Automatic links to other wiki pages