#summary One-sentence summary of this page.

= Practical 2i. Metier Identification =
==Introduction==
The European Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) calls for the implementation of an ecosystem-based approach to fisheries management (EBFM), to achieve good environmental status as required by the Marine Strategy Framework Directive. This has led in the last years to the enforcement of an area-based management scheme and includes measures to control and limit the fishing impact on the ecosystem. As part of the process, the CFP recognizes the importance of accounting for heterogeneity in fishing practices and there is a desire to move toward a fleet-based management. To make this approach operational, detailed information is needed on the various fishing activities of the fleets, as well as on their spatial and temporal distribution.  The overall aim is to pigeonhole fishing activity into fewer and more easy-to-manage categories. However, no single and fully unified approach has emerged, as there are so many criteria and scales that can be used. The European Community’s Data Collection Framework (DCF; EC, 2008), has been an important milestone and suggests a common framework for all European Member states, defining the needs and requirement for fisheries data collection. The DCF has adopted the following definitions which will be used throughout the subsequent analyses: 

A fleet segment is a group of vessels with the same length class (LOA, Length Over All) and predominant fishing gear during the year. Vessels may have different fishing activities during the reference period, but might be classified in only one fleet segment. 

A métier is a group of fishing operations targeting a similar (assemblage of) species, using similar gear, during the same period of the year and/or within the same area, and which are characterized by a similar exploitation pattern. (Note: ICES (2003) used to define the term fishery as well, as being the metier practiced by a given fleet segment, but this distinction has not been maintained]. 

The analysis of catch and effort per métiers would allow more accurate estimates of fishing mortalities and so the DCF has thus defined metiers according to a hierarchical structure using six nested levels: level 1- Activity (fishing/non fishing);  
level 2- Gear class (e.g., trawls, dredges, etc.);
level 3- Gear groups (e.g., bottom trawl, pelagic trawl);
level 4- EU level gear type (e.g., Bottom Otter trawl OTB, bottom pair trawl PTB);
level 5- Target assemblage (e.g., Demersal fish, crustaceans);
level 6- Selectivity feature of the gear (mesh size class and presence/absence of a selective device with its technical characteristics). 

Here we define a seventh level which is not an official DCF definition but it represents the 'true' targeted species better than the rather crude DCF level 5.  To do this it is clearly necessary to establish common methods and tools for grouping logbooks data into metiers. Logbook data provide information for each trip by each vessel on the amount of the main species caught and kept on board; the catch date; the specific ICES statistical rectangle; and the type of gear used.  The information on DCF levels 1 to 4, and to some extent level 6, is straightforward because it is directly available in the logbooks. However, fishers do not declare which species they are actually targeting when fishing, and therefore the definition of Level 5, is expected to (but may not) reflect the fishing intention, and must be inferred from the available data, and in particular the catch data. 

The simplest approach consists of selecting the fishing trips where a certain catch proportion of selected key species is exceeded. This approach is largely based on trial & error processes, and requires often a qualitative a priori knowledge on the fisheries. Another approach consists of conducting multivariate analyses on the species composition in catch data by trip or fishing operation (referred to as catch profiles), then grouping similar catch profiles into métiers. This grouping can be performed by direct visual inspection (Biseau and Gondeaux, 1988; Laurec et al., 1991) or statistically through clustering analysis. Within this approach, a large number of statistical methods, settings and software have been used. Rogers and Pickitch (1992) used two opposite types of hierarchical clustering techniques and detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) to define groundfish assemblages in Oregon and Washington waters. Lewy and Vinther (1994) used a Hierarchical Ascending Cluster analysis (HAC) when identifying Danish North Sea trawl fisheries, and a similar approach was later used by Holley and Marchal (2004) and Marchal (2008) on French fisheries. He et al. (1997) used first a non hierarchical k-means cluster method, then a hierarchical cluster analysis on Hawaii longline fisheries. Pelletier and Ferraris (2000) combined Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and HAC to identify métiers of both an artisanal Senegalese fishery and French Celtic Sea fisheries, and this combination of methods was subsequently used elsewhere in a number of analyses (e.g. Ulrich and Andersen, 2004; Campos et al., 1997; Katsanevakis et al., 2010). Finally, non hierarchical clustering methods were used for classifying métiers in the Iberian peninsula, using Partition Around Medoids (PAM) for Portuguese purse seine fisheries (Silva et al., 2010) and its variant clustering large applications (CLARA) for Spanish otter trawl fisheries (Punzon et al., 2010). 
These alternative methods to identify métiers raise a number of questions. First, it underlines that even with statistical methods, métier classification is somehow still subjective, while the robustness of the results to the methodological choices is largely unknown. Second, while the DCF aims at unifying métiers definitions at the national scale to the regional basin level, all analyses described above where performed for individual countries or selected fisheries only, without consideration of consistency across neighbouring fisheries. Considering métiers at the regional scale instead may likely lead to different classifications because of larger heterogeneity when pooling catch profiles of several countries with likely different historical fishing practices; and it may also raise new computational issues due to larger datasets. Third, all outcomes relate to target assemblage at the species level, but are not  nested in  the more species aggregated types defined in DCF level 5. Finally, all studies relate to ex-post analyses of historical data aggregated over given periods of time (generally per year) but do not address the issue of predicting the métier of new logbook data coming in during future periods.
To address all these issues we developed an operational tool that would allow i) to perform sensitivity analyses of métier definition (at the level 7) to a variety of previously used classification methods in order to select the most robust methods, ii) to predict the métier of a new dataset, and iii) to link the results obtained at level 7) to the DCF level 5.The relevance of the whole procedure will be illustrated from the example of to the international bottom otter trawl (OTB) fishery from logbooks data gathered for the main countries (Denmark, England, France, Scotland and the Netherlands) fishing in the North Sea region, which all together cover around XX % (DATA ICES MIXFISH) of the main demersal fisheries in the area.  


Add your content here.


= Details =

Add your content here.  Format your content with:
  * Text in *bold* or _italic_
  * Headings, paragraphs, and lists
  * Automatic links to other wiki pages